.TH VEB 3
.SH NAME
Veb, vebnew, vebsize, vebput, vebdel, vebsucc, vebpred
\- Van Emde Boas tree structure for efficient storing and traversal of integer sets over a fixed universe of elements.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B #include <veb.h>
.br
.PP
.B typedef unsigned char uchar;
.br
.B typedef unsigned int uint;
.br
.B typedef struct Veb Veb;
.br
.PP
.B struct Veb
.br
.B {
.br
.B 	uchar *D;
.br
.B 	uint k;
.br
.B 	uint M;
.br
.B };
.br
.PP
.B uint vebsize(uint M);
.br
.B Veb vebnew(uint M, int full);
.br
.B void vebdel(Veb T, uint n);
.br
.B void vebput(Veb T, uint n);
.br
.B uint vebsucc(Veb T, uint n);
.br
.B uint vebpred(Veb T, uint n);
.br
.SH DESCRIPTION
Van Emde Boas tree is a tree data structure that can store a set on a universe of size
.I M,
such that operations on the set can be performed in time
.I O(log(log(M))).
However, the structure consumes a fixed size in memory of the order
.I O(M).
.PP
.I Vebsize
returns the size of the data structure in bytes. This is a recursive function:
.I S(M) = O(1) + (sqrt(M)+1)S(sqrt(M)).
The size for
.I M
less than or equal to the machine word size return the number of bits in a word.
.PP
.I Vebnew
allocates memory for a new tree of size
.I M
and if the argument
.I full
is true the structure is initialised to a full set otherwise it is initially empty.
.PP
.I Vebput
inserts the element
.I n
into the structure
.I T
and likewise
.I vebdel
removes it.
.PP
.I Vebsucc
is the successor function on the structure
.I T.
It returns the element
.I n
if
.I n
is in the set, and the smallest element,
.I m
such that
.I m > n
if
.I n
was not contained in
.I T.
In case there is no such element
.I m
.I vebsucc
returns
.I T.M,
the number of elements contained in
.I T.
.PP
.I Vebpred
is the complementing predecessor function returning the element
.I n
if
.I n
is in the set, and the largest element,
.I m
such that
.I m < n
if
.I n
was not contained in
.I T
and
.I T.M
if no such element can be found.
.PP
Freeing the allocated memory of a structure
.I T
can be done by simply freeing
.I T.D.
.PP
The convenience of this implementation is that the structure can be stored on disk by simply writing
.I T.D.
The size of the structure is also constant and thus there is no need for reallocating space as the set is changed.
.SH REFERENCES
.B Peter van Emde Boas, R. Kaas, and E. Zijlstra,
Design and Implementation of an Efficient Priority Queue (Mathematical Systems Theory 10: 99-127, 1977)
